📚 Backup and Recovery
&ensp; 

## <a name="mongodump"></a>📖 mongodump
&ensp; It is a utility tool that comes with MongoDB, which is used to create a backup of your data by capturing the BSON output from your MongoDB database. 
It is especially useful when you want to export data from MongoDB instances, clusters or replica sets for either backup purposes or to migrate data from one environment to another.
+ Backup Creation: 
  * mongodump creates backups by connecting to a MongoDB instance and dumping the data from specified databases or collections. 
  * By default, it dumps all databases in the MongoDB instance.
+ Output Format: 
  * The output generated by mongodump is a set of BSON files that contain the data and metadata of the dumped databases or collections. 
  * It also includes indexes and other necessary information.
+ Options and Parameters: 
  * mongodump provides several options to customize the backup process. 
  * You can specify the database or collection to dump, compression options, authentication details, and output directory, among others.
+ Consistency: 
  * By default, mongodump performs backups in a manner that ensures a consistent snapshot of the data. 
  * It uses a database-level read lock during the backup process to prevent any changes to the data while the backup is being created.

### How it work
&ensp;Mongodump connects to a running **mongod** or **mongos** process and extracts the **BSON data** from the database, which includes collections, their documents, and indexes. The tool stores the exported data in a binary format in a directory named **dump** by default, with each collection’s data placed inside a separate BSON file.

> _Here’s a basic example of using mongodump:_
> > ```perl
> >  mongodump --uri "mongodb://username:password@host:port/database" --out /path/to/output/dir
> > ```
>  - _Replace the values for username, password, host, port, and database with your actual MongoDB credentials and target database._
>  - _This command will create a backup of your specified database and will store it in the specified output directory._

Mongodump offers a variety of options to customize your backups:
* --uri: connection string with authentication details.
* --out: path to save the output data.
* --db: specific database to backup.
* --collection: specific collection to backup.
* --query: optional query to export only matching documents.
* --oplog: data for a consistent point-in-time snapshot.
* --gzip: compress the backup files using gzip.
* --archive: write output to single archive file instead of individual files.

> _Here’s a basic example of using mongorestore:_
> > ```perl
> >  mongorestore --uri "mongodb://username:password@host:port/database" --drop /path/to/backup/dir
> > ```
> _This command will restore the specified database from the backup directory, and the --drop flag will remove any existing data in the target database before restoring the data._


## <a name="mongorestore"></a>📖 mongorestore
&ensp; It is a utility tool that comes with MongoDB and is used to restore a binary database dump from mongodump. 
It is particularly helpful in scenarios where you need to recover your database, migrate data between MongoDB instances, or manage your data backup strategy.
+ Backup Restoration: 
  * mongorestore connects to a MongoDB instance and restores the data from the BSON files created by mongodump. 
  * It recreates the databases, collections, indexes, and other metadata.
+ Options and Parameters: 
  * mongorestore offers various options to customize the restore process. 
  * You can specify the input directory, authentication details, drop the existing data before restore, and more.
+ Concurrency: 
  * mongorestore can perform parallel inserts during the restoration process, which can speed up the restore operation by utilizing multiple threads.
+ Indexes and Metadata: 
  * When restoring a backup, mongorestore also restores the indexes and other metadata associated with the collections. 
  * This ensures that the restored data is in the same state as when it was backed up.

> _Here’s a basic usage of mongorestore:_
> > ```perl
> >  mongorestore /path/to/your/dump/folder
> > ```
> _This command will restore the dump in the specified folder._

Common Options
* --host: target MongoDB instance (default: localhost)4
* --port: port number of target MongoDB instance (default: 27017);
* --username: username for authentication (if needed);
* --password: password for authentication (if needed);
* --authenticationDatabase: database that holds user’s credentials (default: admin);
* --db: single database to restore (default: all databases in the dump folder);
* --collection: single collection to restore (default: all collections in the dump folder);
* --drop: drops database or collection before importing data;
* --gzip: decompresses input BSON files before importing (use with compressed dumps);
* --archive: Reads/writes the database dump as an archive file;
* --nsExclude: exclude namespaces with specified pattern from restore.

> Examples\
>  - _Restore only a specific database:_
> > ```shell
> >  mongorestore --db=mydatabase /path/to/your/dump/folder
> > ```
>  - _Restore using gzip format:_
> > ```shell
> >  mongorestore --db=mydatabase /path/to/your/dump/folder
> > ```
>  - _Restore with authentication:_
> > ```shell
> >  mongorestore --username=myUser --password=myPassword /path/to/your/dump/folder
> > ```
>  - _Restore to a remote MongoDB instance:_
> > ```shell
> >  mongorestore --host=remoteHost --port=27017 /path/to/your/dump/folder
> > ```








